docs/getting_started.rst, before:

Getting Started
################

Python `Jupyter notebooks <https://jupyter.org>`_ are an excellent way to
experiment with data science and visualization. Using the higlass-jupyter
extension, you can use HiGlass directly from within a Jupyter notebook.

Installation
-------------

To use higlass within a Jupyter notebook you need to install a few packages
and enable the jupyter extension:


.. code-block:: bash

    pip install jupyter higlass-python

    jupyter nbextension install --py --sys-prefix --symlink higlass
    jupyter nbextension enable --py --sys-prefix higlass

If you use `JupyterLab <https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`_ you also have to run

.. code-block:: bash

    jupyter labextension install @jupyter-widgets/jupyterlab-manager
    jupyter labextension install higlass-jupyter


Uninstalling
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

    jupyter nbextension uninstall --py --sys-prefix higlass

View extent
-----------

The extent of a view can be set using the ``initialXDomain`` parameter:

.. code-block:: python

    view1 = View([
        Track(type='top-axis'),
    ], initialXDomain=[0,1e7])

Multiple Views
--------------

Multiple views can be instantiated much like single views. They are positioned a on grid that is 12 units wide and an arbitrary number of units high. Thus to create two side by side views, set both to be 6 units wide and one on the right to be at x position 6:

.. code-block:: python

  import higlass
  from higlass.client import Track, View

  view1 = View([Track(type='top-axis')], x=0, width=6)
  view2 = View([Track(type='top-axis')], x=6, width=6)

  display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1, view2])
  display

.. image:: img/two-simple-views.png

Synchronization
---------------

Views and track can be synchronized by location, zoom level and values scales.

Zoom and Location locks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Location locks ensure that when one view is panned, all synchronized views pan
with it. Zoom locks do the same with zoom level. Both can be instantiated by
passing lists of views to lock to ``higlass.display``. Each set of locked
views will scroll or zoom (or both) together:

.. code-block:: python

  display, server, viewconf = higlass.display(
    [view1, view2],
    location_syncs=[[view1, view2]],
    zoom_syncs=[[view1, view2]])


Other Examples
--------------

The examples below demonstrate how to use the HiGlass Python API to view
data locally in a Jupyter notebook or a browser-based HiGlass instance.

For a fYou can find the demos from the talk at `github.com/higlass/scipy19 <https://github.com/higlass/scipy19>`_.

Jupyter HiGlass Component
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To instantiate a HiGlass component within a Jupyter notebook, we first need
to specify which data should be loaded. This can be accomplished with the
help of the ``higlass.client`` module:

.. code-block:: python

    from higlass.client import View, Track
    import higlass


    view1 = View([
        Track(track_type='top-axis', position='top'),
        Track(track_type='heatmap', position='center',
              tileset_uuid='CQMd6V_cRw6iCI_-Unl3PQ',
              server="http://higlass.io/api/v1/",
              height=250,
              options={ 'valueScaleMax': 0.5 }),
    ])

    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1])
    display

The result is a fully interactive HiGlass view direcly embedded in the Jupyter
notebook.

.. image:: img/remote-hic.png

Remote bigWig Files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

bigWig files can be loaded either from the local disk or from remote http
servers. The example below demonstrates how to load a remote bigWig file from
the UCSC genome browser's archives. Note that this is a network-heavy operation
that may take a long time to complete with a slow internet connection.

.. code-block:: python

    from higlass.client import View, Track
    import higlass.tilesets

    ts1 = higlass.tilesets.bigwig(
        'http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/hg19/encodeDCC/'
        'wgEncodeSydhTfbs/wgEncodeSydhTfbsGm12878InputStdSig.bigWig')

    tr1 = Track('horizontal-bar', tileset=ts1)
    view1 = View([tr1])
    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1])

    display


Serving local data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To view local data, we need to define the tilesets and set up a temporary
server.

Cooler Files
""""""""""""

Creating the server:

.. code-block:: python

    from higlass.client import View, Track
    from higlass.tilesets import cooler
    import higlass

    ts1 = cooler('../data/Dixon2012-J1-NcoI-R1-filtered.100kb.multires.cool')
    tr1 = Track('heatmap', tileset=ts1)
    view1 = View([tr1])
    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1])

    display


.. image:: img/jupyter-hic-heatmap.png


BigWig Files
""""""""""""

In this example, we'll set up a server containing both a chromosome labels
track and a bigwig track. Furthermore, the bigwig track will be ordered
according to the chromosome info in the specified file.

.. code-block:: python


    from higlass.client import View, Track
    from higlass.tilesets import bigwig, chromsizes
    import higlass.tilesets

    chromsizes_fp = '../data/chromSizes_hg19_reordered.tsv'
    bigwig_fp = '../data/wgEncodeCaltechRnaSeqHuvecR1x75dTh1014IlnaPlusSignalRep2.bigWig'

    with open(chromsizes_fp) as f:
        chromsizes = []
        for line in f.readlines():
            chrom, size = line.split('\t')
            chromsizes.append((chrom, int(size)))

    cs = chromsizes(chromsizes)
    ts = bigwig(bigwig_fp, chromsizes=chromsizes)

    tr0 = Track('top-axis')
    tr1 = Track('horizontal-bar', tileset=ts)
    tr2 = Track('horizontal-chromosome-labels', position='top', tileset=cs)

    view1 = View([tr0, tr1, tr2])
    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1])

    display

The client view will be composed such that three tracks are visible. Two of them
are served from the local server.

.. image:: img/jupyter-bigwig.png


Serving custom data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


To display data, we need to define a tileset. Tilesets define two functions:
``tileset_info``:

.. code-block:: python

    > from higlass.tilesets import bigwig
    > ts1 = bigwig('http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/hg19/encodeDCC/wgEncodeSydhTfbs/wgEncodeSydhTfbsGm12878InputStdSig.bigWig')
    > ts1.tileset_info()
    {
     'min_pos': [0],
     'max_pos': [4294967296],
     'max_width': 4294967296,
     'tile_size': 1024,
     'max_zoom': 22,
     'chromsizes': [['chr1', 249250621],
                    ['chr2', 243199373],
                    ...],
     'aggregation_modes': {'mean': {'name': 'Mean', 'value': 'mean'},
                           'min': {'name': 'Min', 'value': 'min'},
                           'max': {'name': 'Max', 'value': 'max'},
                           'std': {'name': 'Standard Deviation', 'value': 'std'}},
     'range_modes': {'minMax': {'name': 'Min-Max', 'value': 'minMax'},
                     'whisker': {'name': 'Whisker', 'value': 'whisker'}}
     }

and ``tiles``:

.. code-block:: python

    > ts1.tiles(['x.0.0'])
    [('x.0.0',
      {'min_value': 0.0,
       'max_value': 9.119079544037932,
       'dense': 'Rh25PwcCcz...',   # base64 string encoding the array of data
       'size': 1,
       'dtype': 'float32'})]

The tiles function will always take an array of tile ids of the form ``id.z.x[.y][.transform]``
where ``z`` is the zoom level, ``x`` is the tile's x position, ``y`` is the tile's
y position (for 2D tilesets) and ``transform`` is some transform to be applied to the
data (e.g. normalization types like ``ice``).

Numpy Matrix
""""""""""""

By way of example, let's explore a numpy matrix by implementing the `tileset_info` and `tiles`
functions described above. To start let's make the matrix using the
`Eggholder function <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_functions_for_optimization>`_.

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np

    dim = 2000
    I, J = np.indices((dim, dim))
    data = (
        -(J + 47) * np.sin(np.sqrt(np.abs(I / 2 + (J + 47))))
        - I * np.sin(np.sqrt(np.abs(I - (J + 47))))
    )

Then we can define the data and tell the server how to render it.

.. code-block:: python

    from  clodius.tiles import npmatrix
    from higlass.tilesets import Tileset

    ts = Tileset(
        tileset_info=lambda: npmatrix.tileset_info(data),
        tiles=lambda tids: npmatrix.tiles_wrapper(data, tids)
    )

    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([
        View([
            Track(track_type='top-axis', position='top'),
            Track(track_type='left-axis', position='left'),
            Track(track_type='heatmap',
                  position='center',
                  tileset=ts,
                  height=250,
                  options={ 'valueScaleMax': 0.5 }),

        ])
    ])
    display

.. image:: img/eggholder-function.png

Displaying Many Points
""""""""""""""""""""""

To display, for example, a list of 1 million points in a HiGlass window inside of a Jupyter notebook.
First we need to import the custom track type for displaying labelled points:

.. code-block:: javascript

    %%javascript

    require(["https://unpkg.com/higlass-labelled-points-track@0.1.11/dist/higlass-labelled-points-track"],
        function(hglib) {

    });

Then we have to set up a data server to output the data in "tiles".

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    import pandas as pd
    from higlass.client import View, Track
    from higlass.tilesets import dfpoints

    length = int(1e6)
    df = pd.DataFrame({
        'x': np.random.random((length,)),
        'y': np.random.random((length,)),
        'v': range(1, length+1),
    })

    ts = dfpoints(df, x_col='x', y_col='y')

    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([
        View([
            Track('left-axis'),
            Track('top-axis'),
            Track('labelled-points-track',
                   tileset=ts,
                   position='center',
                   height=600,
                   options={
                        'xField': 'x',
                        'yField': 'y',
                        'labelField': 'v'
            }),
        ])
    ])

    display

.. image:: img/jupyter-labelled-points.png

This same technique can be used to display points in a GeoJSON file.
First we have to extract the values from the GeoJSON file and
create a dataframe:

.. code-block:: python

    import math

    def lat2y(a):
      return 180.0/math.pi*math.log(math.tan(math.pi/4.0+a*(math.pi/180.0)/2.0))

    x = [t['geometry']['coordinates'][0] for t in trees['features']]
    y = [-lat2y(t['geometry']['coordinates'][1]) for t in trees['features']]
    names = [t['properties']['SPECIES'] for t in trees['features']]

    df = pd.DataFrame({ 'x': x, 'y': y, 'names': names })
    df = df.sample(frac=1).reset_index(drop=True)

And then create the tileset and track, as before.

.. code-block:: python

    from higlass.client import View, Track
    from higlass.tilesets import dfpoints

    ts = dfpoints(df, x_col='x', y_col='y')

    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([
        View([
            Track('left-axis'),
            Track('top-axis'),
            Track('osm-tiles', position='center'),
            Track('labelled-points-track',
                   tileset=ts,
                   position='center',
                   height=600,
                   options={
                        'xField': 'x',
                        'yField': 'y',
                        'labelField': 'names'
            }),
        ])
    ])

    display

.. image:: img/geojson-jupyter.png


Other constructs
""""""""""""""""

The examples containing dense data above use the `bundled_tiles_wrapper_2d`
function to translate lists of tile_ids to tile data. This consolidates tiles
that are within rectangular blocks and fulfills them simultaneously. The
return type is a list of ``(tile_id, formatted_tile_data)`` tuples.

In cases where we don't have such a function handy, there's the simpler
`tiles_wrapper_2d` which expects the target to fullfill just single tile
requests:

.. code-block:: python

    from clodius.tiles.format import format_dense_tile
    from clodius.tiles.utils import tiles_wrapper_2d
    from higlass.tilesets import Tileset

    ts = Tileset(
        tileset_info=tileset_info,
        tiles=lambda tile_ids: tiles_wrapper_2d(tile_ids,
                        lambda z,x,y: format_dense_tile(tile_data(z, x, y)))
    )


In this case, we expect *tile_data* to simply return a matrix of values.

Commit message:

Docs updates, some code reformatting

docs/getting_started.rst, after:

Getting Started
################

Python `Jupyter notebooks <https://jupyter.org>`_ are an excellent way to
experiment with data science and visualization. Using the higlass-jupyter
extension, you can use HiGlass directly from within a Jupyter notebook.

Installation
-------------

To use higlass within a Jupyter notebook you need to install a few packages
and enable the jupyter extension:


.. code-block:: bash

    pip install jupyter higlass-python

    jupyter nbextension install --py --sys-prefix --symlink higlass
    jupyter nbextension enable --py --sys-prefix higlass

If you use `JupyterLab <https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`_ you also have to run

.. code-block:: bash

    jupyter labextension install @jupyter-widgets/jupyterlab-manager
    jupyter labextension install higlass-jupyter


Uninstalling
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: bash

    jupyter nbextension uninstall --py --sys-prefix higlass

View extent
-----------

The extent of a view can be set using the ``initialXDomain`` parameter:

.. code-block:: python

    view1 = View([
        Track(type='top-axis'),
    ], initialXDomain=[0,1e7])

Track Types
-----------

A list of available track types can be found in the `documentation for HiGlass
<https://docs.higlass.io/track_types.html>`_. Based on the data type, we can
sometimes provide a recommended track type as well as a recommended position.

.. code-block:: python

  import higlass.client as hgc
  track_type, position = hgc.datatype_to_tracktype(datatype)


Multiple Views
--------------

Multiple views can be instantiated much like single views. They are positioned a on grid that is 12 units wide and an arbitrary number of units high. To create two side by side views, set both to be 6 units wide and one on the right to be at x position 6:

.. code-block:: python

  import higlass
  from higlass.client import Track, View

  view1 = View([Track(type='top-axis')], x=0, width=6)
  view2 = View([Track(type='top-axis')], x=6, width=6)

  display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1, view2])
  display

.. image:: img/two-simple-views.png

Synchronization
---------------

Views and track can be synchronized by location, zoom level and values scales.

Zoom and Location locks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Location locks ensure that when one view is panned, all synchronized views pan
with it. Zoom locks do the same with zoom level. Both can be instantiated by
passing lists of views to lock to ``higlass.display``. Each set of locked
views will scroll or zoom (or both) together:

.. code-block:: python

  display, server, viewconf = higlass.display(
    [view1, view2],
    location_syncs=[[view1, view2]],
    zoom_syncs=[[view1, view2]])


Other Examples
--------------

The examples below demonstrate how to use the HiGlass Python API to view
data locally in a Jupyter notebook or a browser-based HiGlass instance.

For a fYou can find the demos from the talk at `github.com/higlass/scipy19 <https://github.com/higlass/scipy19>`_.

Jupyter HiGlass Component
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To instantiate a HiGlass component within a Jupyter notebook, we first need
to specify which data should be loaded. This can be accomplished with the
help of the ``higlass.client`` module:

.. code-block:: python

    from higlass.client import View, Track
    import higlass


    view1 = View([
        Track(track_type='top-axis', position='top'),
        Track(track_type='heatmap', position='center',
              tileset_uuid='CQMd6V_cRw6iCI_-Unl3PQ',
              server="http://higlass.io/api/v1/",
              height=250,
              options={ 'valueScaleMax': 0.5 }),
    ])

    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1])
    display

The result is a fully interactive HiGlass view direcly embedded in the Jupyter
notebook.

.. image:: img/remote-hic.png

Remote bigWig Files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

bigWig files can be loaded either from the local disk or from remote http
servers. The example below demonstrates how to load a remote bigWig file from
the UCSC genome browser's archives. Note that this is a network-heavy operation
that may take a long time to complete with a slow internet connection.

.. code-block:: python

    from higlass.client import View, Track
    import higlass.tilesets

    ts1 = higlass.tilesets.bigwig(
        'http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/hg19/encodeDCC/'
        'wgEncodeSydhTfbs/wgEncodeSydhTfbsGm12878InputStdSig.bigWig')

    tr1 = Track('horizontal-bar', tileset=ts1)
    view1 = View([tr1])
    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1])

    display


Serving local data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To view local data, we need to define the tilesets and set up a temporary
server.

Cooler Files
""""""""""""

Creating the server:

.. code-block:: python

    from higlass.client import View, Track
    from higlass.tilesets import cooler
    import higlass

    ts1 = cooler('../data/Dixon2012-J1-NcoI-R1-filtered.100kb.multires.cool')
    tr1 = Track('heatmap', tileset=ts1)
    view1 = View([tr1])
    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1])

    display


.. image:: img/jupyter-hic-heatmap.png


BigWig Files
""""""""""""

In this example, we'll set up a server containing both a chromosome labels
track and a bigwig track. Furthermore, the bigwig track will be ordered
according to the chromosome info in the specified file.

.. code-block:: python


    from higlass.client import View, Track
    from higlass.tilesets import bigwig, chromsizes
    import higlass.tilesets

    chromsizes_fp = '../data/chromSizes_hg19_reordered.tsv'
    bigwig_fp = '../data/wgEncodeCaltechRnaSeqHuvecR1x75dTh1014IlnaPlusSignalRep2.bigWig'

    with open(chromsizes_fp) as f:
        chromsizes = []
        for line in f.readlines():
            chrom, size = line.split('\t')
            chromsizes.append((chrom, int(size)))

    cs = chromsizes(chromsizes)
    ts = bigwig(bigwig_fp, chromsizes=chromsizes)

    tr0 = Track('top-axis')
    tr1 = Track('horizontal-bar', tileset=ts)
    tr2 = Track('horizontal-chromosome-labels', position='top', tileset=cs)

    view1 = View([tr0, tr1, tr2])
    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([view1])

    display

The client view will be composed such that three tracks are visible. Two of them
are served from the local server.

.. image:: img/jupyter-bigwig.png


Serving custom data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


To display data, we need to define a tileset. Tilesets define two functions:
``tileset_info``:

.. code-block:: python

    > from higlass.tilesets import bigwig
    > ts1 = bigwig('http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/hg19/encodeDCC/wgEncodeSydhTfbs/wgEncodeSydhTfbsGm12878InputStdSig.bigWig')
    > ts1.tileset_info()
    {
     'min_pos': [0],
     'max_pos': [4294967296],
     'max_width': 4294967296,
     'tile_size': 1024,
     'max_zoom': 22,
     'chromsizes': [['chr1', 249250621],
                    ['chr2', 243199373],
                    ...],
     'aggregation_modes': {'mean': {'name': 'Mean', 'value': 'mean'},
                           'min': {'name': 'Min', 'value': 'min'},
                           'max': {'name': 'Max', 'value': 'max'},
                           'std': {'name': 'Standard Deviation', 'value': 'std'}},
     'range_modes': {'minMax': {'name': 'Min-Max', 'value': 'minMax'},
                     'whisker': {'name': 'Whisker', 'value': 'whisker'}}
     }

and ``tiles``:

.. code-block:: python

    > ts1.tiles(['x.0.0'])
    [('x.0.0',
      {'min_value': 0.0,
       'max_value': 9.119079544037932,
       'dense': 'Rh25PwcCcz...',   # base64 string encoding the array of data
       'size': 1,
       'dtype': 'float32'})]

The tiles function will always take an array of tile ids of the form ``id.z.x[.y][.transform]``
where ``z`` is the zoom level, ``x`` is the tile's x position, ``y`` is the tile's
y position (for 2D tilesets) and ``transform`` is some transform to be applied to the
data (e.g. normalization types like ``ice``).

Numpy Matrix
""""""""""""

By way of example, let's explore a numpy matrix by implementing the `tileset_info` and `tiles`
functions described above. To start let's make the matrix using the
`Eggholder function <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_functions_for_optimization>`_.

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np

    dim = 2000
    I, J = np.indices((dim, dim))
    data = (
        -(J + 47) * np.sin(np.sqrt(np.abs(I / 2 + (J + 47))))
        - I * np.sin(np.sqrt(np.abs(I - (J + 47))))
    )

Then we can define the data and tell the server how to render it.

.. code-block:: python

    from  clodius.tiles import npmatrix
    from higlass.tilesets import Tileset

    ts = Tileset(
        tileset_info=lambda: npmatrix.tileset_info(data),
        tiles=lambda tids: npmatrix.tiles_wrapper(data, tids)
    )

    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([
        View([
            Track(track_type='top-axis', position='top'),
            Track(track_type='left-axis', position='left'),
            Track(track_type='heatmap',
                  position='center',
                  tileset=ts,
                  height=250,
                  options={ 'valueScaleMax': 0.5 }),

        ])
    ])
    display

.. image:: img/eggholder-function.png

Displaying Many Points
""""""""""""""""""""""

To display, for example, a list of 1 million points in a HiGlass window inside of a Jupyter notebook.
First we need to import the custom track type for displaying labelled points:

.. code-block:: javascript

    %%javascript

    require(["https://unpkg.com/higlass-labelled-points-track@0.1.11/dist/higlass-labelled-points-track"],
        function(hglib) {

    });

Then we have to set up a data server to output the data in "tiles".

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    import pandas as pd
    from higlass.client import View, Track
    from higlass.tilesets import dfpoints

    length = int(1e6)
    df = pd.DataFrame({
        'x': np.random.random((length,)),
        'y': np.random.random((length,)),
        'v': range(1, length+1),
    })

    ts = dfpoints(df, x_col='x', y_col='y')

    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([
        View([
            Track('left-axis'),
            Track('top-axis'),
            Track('labelled-points-track',
                   tileset=ts,
                   position='center',
                   height=600,
                   options={
                        'xField': 'x',
                        'yField': 'y',
                        'labelField': 'v'
            }),
        ])
    ])

    display

.. image:: img/jupyter-labelled-points.png

This same technique can be used to display points in a GeoJSON file.
First we have to extract the values from the GeoJSON file and
create a dataframe:

.. code-block:: python

    import math

    def lat2y(a):
      return 180.0/math.pi*math.log(math.tan(math.pi/4.0+a*(math.pi/180.0)/2.0))

    x = [t['geometry']['coordinates'][0] for t in trees['features']]
    y = [-lat2y(t['geometry']['coordinates'][1]) for t in trees['features']]
    names = [t['properties']['SPECIES'] for t in trees['features']]

    df = pd.DataFrame({ 'x': x, 'y': y, 'names': names })
    df = df.sample(frac=1).reset_index(drop=True)

And then create the tileset and track, as before.

.. code-block:: python

    from higlass.client import View, Track
    from higlass.tilesets import dfpoints

    ts = dfpoints(df, x_col='x', y_col='y')

    display, server, viewconf = higlass.display([
        View([
            Track('left-axis'),
            Track('top-axis'),
            Track('osm-tiles', position='center'),
            Track('labelled-points-track',
                   tileset=ts,
                   position='center',
                   height=600,
                   options={
                        'xField': 'x',
                        'yField': 'y',
                        'labelField': 'names'
            }),
        ])
    ])

    display

.. image:: img/geojson-jupyter.png


Other constructs
""""""""""""""""

The examples containing dense data above use the `bundled_tiles_wrapper_2d`
function to translate lists of tile_ids to tile data. This consolidates tiles
that are within rectangular blocks and fulfills them simultaneously. The
return type is a list of ``(tile_id, formatted_tile_data)`` tuples.

In cases where we don't have such a function handy, there's the simpler
`tiles_wrapper_2d` which expects the target to fullfill just single tile
requests:

.. code-block:: python

    from clodius.tiles.format import format_dense_tile
    from clodius.tiles.utils import tiles_wrapper_2d
    from higlass.tilesets import Tileset

    ts = Tileset(
        tileset_info=tileset_info,
        tiles=lambda tile_ids: tiles_wrapper_2d(tile_ids,
                        lambda z,x,y: format_dense_tile(tile_data(z, x, y)))
    )


In this case, we expect *tile_data* to simply return a matrix of values.
